---
layout:		post
title:		Use Disruptive Moments in Life to Pick Up New Habits
summary:	Times of upheaval in your life are the best time to slide in a new routine.
date:		2019-02-10 15-56-10
categories:	life productivity habits
---

I recently moved from the San Francisco Bay Area ("Silicon Valley") to Seattle,
Washington, for both professional and personal reasons. So far, I'm very happy
about this decision. The fact that a rare snowfall is turning downtown Seattle
into a winter wonderland and covering it in a white blanket as I write this is
certainly reinforcing my excitement. Maybe I'll ski to work tomorrow. As a
matter of fact, this is the fifth time I move to a different city in the last
three and a half years. After Munich, London, Boston and the Bay Area, Seattle
is destination #5. You could almost say that Facebook's "Move Fast" mentality is
a good fit for me.

Relocating is always a slightly stressful endeavour. It generates a ton of
administrative labor, and it also takes some time to settle in and recover your
comfort and order in life. Nevertheless, there is one aspect of it that I like
very much. I've found moving to a new environment to be very fertile ground for
successfully picking up new habits that I'd previously conjectured to improve my
happiness, health or efficiency, but thus far had failed or not taken the time
to integrate into my life. The underlying reason is that a move is disruptive to
your life and causes a natural interruption to your daily routine. The movie you
replay every single day as part of your habitual schedule is paused; the movie
set is moved to a new location, the script that guided you through the story is
left behind and you're given a blank notebook to write a new movie. Most of that
blank script gets filled in pretty quickly with an adjusted version of your old
life. However, it's much easier to make an edit here and there than it was
before, when your script was already written and rehearsed a thousand times as
you followed your old habits on a day to day basis. In less ornate words: after
your routines are naturally interrupted for a significant period of time -- at
least a few days -- it takes your brain some time to get back on track. You can
use this time to "slip in" a new habit much more easily than trying to alter
your habits from one random day to the next, when your "habit maintenance"
engine is in steady motion.

To understand this better, it's important to realize that the brain is
incredibly, masterfully adept at maintaining habits once they are solidified.
Humans are creatures of habit, as the popular mantra goes, and for a good
reason: habits save us time and energy. Take breakfast routines as an example.
Most people eat the same breakfast every day. For me, it's the same old oatmeal
with the same old cranberries and the same old yoghurt. Imagine you'd wake up
every morning having forgotten what you usually eat for breakfast and had to
re-evaluate what breakfast best fits your taste, time and health requirements.
Way too much effort. An interesting read on the subject of habits is [*The Power
of Habits*](https://www.amazon.com/Power-Habit-What-Life-Business/dp/081298160X)
by Charles Duhigg. It discusses the science behind habits in great detail,
including how hard it is to break out of existing ones. His most important
takeaway -- at least for me -- is that our brains execute our routines in three
steps. First, we encounter a cue in our environment that pokes the neurons in
our brain responsible for a particular activity. Second, we act on our habit.
Third, our brain receives some reward. Take snacking in the middle of the night
as an example. The cue would be a feeling of hunger. The habit is to eat
chocolate. The reward is the feeling of fullness. Duhigg's advice is to keep the
cue and the reward, but swap out the habit for something that still leads from
the former to the latter, but replaces the undesirable action with a better one.
For the midnight snacking, this might mean snacking celery instead of chocolate.
The cue of feeling hungry at night is still there, the reward of feeling full is
still there, but the habit is a lot healthier.

Now, while Duhigg's method is certainly viable, it relies to a great extent on
the exertion of willpower to induce the change. My argument is that while
willpower will always be necessary to some extent when trying to pick up a new
habit or update an existing one, it is easier to do so when your routine is
already interrupted by an environmental factor. This leads me back to my
observation that natural interruptions like moving to a new city makes it easier
to learn a new habit. Such natural interruptions to your routines can come in
smaller doses than moving to a new city, of course. A perfect example is a
vacation. Most people don't move very often, but certainly everyone except Elon
Musk takes a vacation once in a while. In essence, a vacation is a shorter,
time-restricted version of moving to a new city or country. It thus provides
similar benefits for altering your habits. Let's take a practical example of
wanting to introduce the habit of waking up earlier -- 7 AM instead of 9 AM.
Trying to change your wake time from one random day to the next, with no
external stimulus, requires immense willpower and is very hard. Instead, wait
for a vacation. Your sleep schedule will probably be different from your typical
work week -- maybe there's even a time difference -- and thus your routine will
be naturally interrupted. When you get back from vacation, it'll take some time
to re-adjust to your habitual schedule. It is precisely in this -- short --
re-adjustment period that your "habit muscle" is weak and amenable to change.

An interesting corollary from my argument is that New Year's resolutions are a
bad idea. Apart from a spike in your champagne consumption, December 31st really
isn't all that different from January 1st and any difference in your disposition
is likely to be superficial. While it's certainly a good idea to spend some time
thinking about your goals for the next year, there is no significant
interruption to your routines during that period of time to accelerate your
adoption of new routines. As such, you should maybe consider combining your next
New Year's celebration with a vacation to Thailand.

Now, having preached this idea of mine, do I actually have personal examples to
show for it? I do. Since life recently handed me a brand new notebook for a new
movie set here in Seattle, and being convinced there's some truth to this theory
of mine, I'm trying my best to make use of this natural interruption to my life.
I've long wanted to engage in some more high intensity exercise than standard
weightlifting and cardio in the gym. I tried Kickboxing back in the bay -- but
didn't stick with it because my other routines and my schedule got in the way
with it. After my move, I don't even really have a schedule yet, apart from the
approximate hours I'm usually in the office. I've used this opportunity to sign
up for Krav Maga (an Israeli martial art) and am sticking to it (so far). Was it
hard? Not at all. Again, it's about just slipping it into your routine during
times of natural disruption to your habits.

I hope this is useful food for thought and something you keep in mind the next
time you go on vacation, or even move to a different city.
