---
layout:		post
title:		"Dropping Out of College to Join Facebook: 3 Years Later"
summary:	Thoughts on the consequences of the most important decision in my life
date:		2020-07-02 09-47-25
categories:	life
---

10 Brock Street, London. July 3rd, 2017. I'm in the Facebook London office, in
the last few weeks of my internship. It's a beautiful sunny day outside and the
sky is blue. No, wait, that doesn't sound right. This is London. Correction:
It's a gloomy day and raining outside. I have a meeting with my skip manager,
who I meet with every few weeks. The conversation goes something like this:

__Manager__: Peter, the team likes your work and you've impressed some people.<br>
__Peter__: Nice.<br>
__Manager__: So, what are your plans for after your internship?<br>
__Peter__: Well, I should probably go back to university in Munich and finish my Computer Science degree. After, I'm not sure.<br>
__Manager__: Ok, well, listen: If you *so happened* not to want to go back to university, it is, *in theory*, possible for me to change your return internship offer into a full time offer instead. The team could really use your help.

After plugging this through the Enigma machine and decyphering it, this amounted
to an offer to join Facebook full time if I wanted to drop out of college. It
was an offer -- an opportunity -- not a request or a demand. It was my choice.
So how did I decide?

## The Story

Let me give you some more background on how we got to this moment in time. I was
19, going on 20. I had started a degree in Computer Science at the Technical
University of Munich two years prior, in the fall of 2015, after leaving the
pristine lakes of southern Austria where I grew up. In that same fall of 2015,
two months into university, I interviewed for a software engineering internship
at Google and bagged it. I did a solid two semesters at TU Munich following
that, which I did enjoy, although I spent most of my time in a little room
studying and working on research projects. My internship at Google in London
followed. I had to take a semester off for this, as the German academic year
(October to August) aligns badly with the summer internship schedule run by
American tech companies. Because I was already taking a whole semester off and
had some time left after Google, I accepted an offer for another internship from
Bloomberg, also in London. At the end of my internship at Bloomberg I started
interviewing for internships for the next summer (2017) and got an offer from
Facebook. Facebook's schedule was not a lot better than Google's, so I pleaded
my university advisor to give me another semester off. "Just one more, that's
it." Famous last words. In between Bloomberg and Facebook I joined a small
startup doing machine learning research and engaged in an unforgettable
month-long hackathon. Finally, there we were: July 2017, fourth consecutive
internship, two semesters down at TU Munich. I really *was* planning to go back to
Munich after Facebook, until that fateful conversation I recollected above.

I had to think about this decision of course. I needed to meditate on it and
gather data and opinions from the people I was close with and whose opinion I
respected. In hindsight, there is one crucial aspect about *the way* in which I
approached this decision: I treated both options, returning to college after
Facebook or dropping out to join Facebook, as equally viable, "untainted" paths
that could each lead to success in their own way. I believe that is not what most
people would do. Most people would consider returning to college the safe path,
the accepted path, the path their parents and society approves of, the one that
will lead to great knowledge and ability, the path that results in a
distinguished A4 document laid into ones hands by the gatekeepers of societal
and professional recognition. In the US you even get a hat. The idea of dropping
out to join a company, on the other hand, would undoubtedly leave a certain
taint of unease in most people's minds. It would appear rebellious, unsafe,
short-sighted, taking away your own opportunity and sort of lobotomizing your
future self. Good luck trying to make an objective decision with this kind of
baggage attached to one side of the scale.

I really didn't care much for this baggage. I wanted to evaluate these two
options analytically, on their face value. So I talked to people. I talked to my
colleagues at Facebook, who were in their careers where I wanted to be one
hopeful day. Almost every one of them told me to go for it, told me they wished
they had done it themselves a few years ago but simply didn't have the
opportunity or were too scared. One guy said he wouldn't generally recommend it
to every student, but in my case he thought it was a solid decision. One
teammate disagreed. He didn't like the idea and he didn't like the fact that
Facebook was even offering me this option. However, he did organize a video call
with an engineer at Facebook he knew who had never been in college at all, to
hear it from the horse's mouth. I remember that video call. The engineer told me
that in the end, he got to where he wanted to be. He said it wasn't always easy
and that he sometimes had to fight for people's recognition to proove he wasn't
a dumbfuck because he didn't have a degree. He said that sometimes engineers
around him would talk about some obscure theoretical aspect of computer science
that every student would have come across and he wouldn't get the joke. However,
the biggest thing he lacked was the sense of community shared by alumni of the
same school. While two Stanford alumni placed on opposite ends of the Amazon
*will* find each other and create the Stanford Alumni Association of the Amazon
rainforest, he didn't belong to any such tribe at all.

A brief digression. As I've talked to more people about this over the years,
I've gotten the sense that for many, college isn't really about learning things
anyway. My impression is that the biggest value people take away from college is
in the people they meet and the experiences they have. College is a place where
like-minded, like-aged individuals build a network that often carries long into
the later years of their lives. A lot of people meet their spouse in college.
And they have fun. Especially in the US and the UK, colleges are exciting
institutions with sports, societies, clubs, parties and so on. It is this that a
lot of people, in hindsight, would not give up if they had the choice I had.

My one year in college was very different. For one, German universities don't
really do societies or sports at the scale that American colleges do. There was
only one major club at TU Munich, the TU Investment Club a student hedge fund,
which I joined and which indeed provided valuable friends and contacts up until
today. But it stopped there and, at least in my environment there was no
partying, not really any fun. I spent 95% of my time in my room in the sleepy
suburb of Garching, studying and studying. Now contrast this with my year in
London. I was living some sort of fairytale life. I lived smack in the center of
one of the most vibrant cities in the world, working at hot tech companies with
quirky multicolored offices, lying upside down on couches feeding myself free
food. I was getting paid a lot of money to do work that I loved and gained
insane amounts of knowledge every day by working the job I was studying to
attain. I was having a good time with other interns, did fun activities with my
team and was sipping champagne on a ferris wheel at the Facebook summer party.
So while most people would be hard-pressed to trade in the happy-jolly-fun times
at college with the hardships and stress of their working lives any sooner than
absolutely necessary, it was quite the reverse in my case.

Back to making my decision. I, like many people, too, have parents. Like many
people's parents, mine were also not immediately thrilled by the idea of me
throwing my college degree out the window and selling my soul to the corporate
world. There were arguments. This is natural, because again, most people would
not approach the two paths as equally viable. The stigma of not having a college
degree sits too deep within the soul of our society. So the initial reaction was
"no, definitely you are not doing that". Fortunately, after some time and some
verbal fencing, we got down to the good stuff, the cold calculations, the
listing of pros and cons. Some important questions were asked and answered.
Ultimately, we came to the conclusion that in terms of *useful* knowledge to be
gained, job prospects and most importantly happiness, dropping out was the
better choice. There were repercussions of course. There would be certain doors
that would close. I wouldn't be able to apply for certain visas in certain
countries for example. However I'm a US, French and Austrian citizen and that
covers a reasonably wide job market, so missing out on working in Japan is
something I could live with as long as I was still allowed to eat Japanese food.

One thought: Dropping out might seem to many as the "riskier" option compared to
staying in university. The latter is the safe choice, where you can't really go
wrong. You'll learn something and you'll get a degree --- no risk in that. But I
didn't see it that way. I perceived both options as risky. To me, staying in
university carried a very high potential opportunity cost. There was a
legitimate risk that I would spend another two years learning less and making
less progress towards my long term goals of success than if I did drop out. As
an ambitious person who was very eager to maximize my potential in every
possible way and really had't a minute to spare in that pursuit, that outcome
seemed worse to me than discovering minor roadblocks later on due to not having
a degree.

So the decision was made. I told my manager that I wanted a full time offer. A
few weeks later I got it and accepted an offer for a full time Software
Engineering position at Facebook in Menlo Park, USA. Yes, I was moving to the US
too. In fact I was moving there for a short time anyway because after my
Facebook internship ended in August, I conveniently booked myself another
3-month internship at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard in Cambridge, MA to
do some machine learning research. And thus was my brief college career. Two
years, one actually there and the other on leave doing five internships.

## Life As a Dropout

Thus far I have recounted the story of how I became a college dropout. While I
was confident in my decision at the time, I certainly had my doubts and fears. I
was fearful of how my future colleagues would perceive me and doubtful of
whether I'd come to regret my decision for unforeseen reasons. When I reflect on
the past three years, there is a very noticeable "arc" in how I dealt with this
fear and doubt. In the beginning, when I first joined Facebook, I tried as hard
as possible to hide the fact that I had dropped out. The first time I recall
this fear of what people would think of me was one month before I started
full time. I was sitting at dinner with Mark Zuckerberg, in his house in Palo
Alto. A few Facebook interns every year get to partake in this "ceremony" and I
was one of them that year. I remember that throughout that evening I was asking
myself what he would think if I told him that I'd dropped out of school to join
his company. Dropping out clearly worked out pretty well for him, but I just
couldn't get myself to mention it to him. I was afraid.

At Facebook, I didn't help myself by not just joining any random part of
Facebook as my first team, but joining Facebook AI Research, where I was
surrounded by PhDs and part-time professors and, by nature of being a research
environment, ties to academia were very strong. This made the burden of my
decision, in my mind, a little bit heavier.

Fortunately, the people there really didn't seem to care about my background at
all, in a good way. I would come to find that at Facebook in general, folks
really care about your skills and the results you bring to the table. When
people ask you where you studied, they ask it as a matter of small talk and not
as a means to "vet your qualifications". You do that by getting shit done and
that's something I was pretty good at. Facebook is also known to have a high
hiring bar, so in hindsight, by virtue of me being there alone I was already
sufficiently qualified. But at the time, that still didn't make me more
comfortable at the idea of people knowing *the truth*.

Of course, I assume some of my colleagues asked themselves why a kid who wasn't
allowed to drink at team dinners was working full time at Facebook. But nobody
was ever condescending to me and I was treated as an equal in all respects at
all times based on my qualities rather than my qualifications. This was very
empowering and paired with fairly rapid progression up the career ladder, helped
to slowly etch away my doubts.

After a year or so of internal and external validation and the realization that
my fear of professional peers thinking less of me was largely unfounded, I
slowly became more open about my educational background. I tried less hard to
hide it and didn't really mind select trustees knowing about it. This process
was accelerated signficantly when I joined a new team in January 2018. This team
was led by my old skip manager, the one who had offered me to drop out in the
first place. He obviously knew all about how I had ended up here and clearly
didn't think it was a bad thing, because in one of our first big team meetings,
he let all thirty people in the team know that "Peter had dropped out to join
Facebook!" That blew my cover a lot faster than I had planned to give it up, but
maybe that was for the better. Because in the end, I recognize now that I really
worried way too much about this all that time before.

The fact of the matter is that my colleagues still didn't really care about it.
If anything, they found it cool and were impressed that I had managed to get to
where I was at my age and without a degree. There were others in our team who
came from non-traditional backgrounds, having studied something completely
different like chemical engineering or theology. They still worked their way
into the industry and it didn't matter as long as they were capable engineers.
So I realized it didn't matter that I dropped out as long as I was a capable
engineer.

Today, I'm a very open book about my decision. I'll happily let anybody know who
wants to know and when I do, I admittedly say it with a hint of pride in my
voice, even wearing it like a badge of honor. Or maybe not pride, but
confidence. Confidence that I'm not a fraud and that I made a bold decision at
the time of which I now feel confirmed. I'm no longer doubtful of my decision
and I'm no longer fearful of what people think of me if they learn of it. In
fact, if I were to meet somebody who looks down on me solely based on the fact
that I do not have the A4 laminated certification of societal recognization, I'd
know that that person is not worth my time. In the same vain, when it comes to
job prospects, if an employer were to reject me for a position I'm well suited
to, based solely on my not having a degree and not based on my experience,
skills and interview performance, I'm now in a position to politely tell that
employer to fuck off -- in more diplomatic wording. I have no interest in
working in an organization that is so obviously ineffiecient to value
qualifications over qualities and I've worked hard enough to put myself into a
position where I don't need to either.

## Hindsight

I believe so far I've made pretty clear that I do not regret my decision to drop
out. By all criteria that I could ever have come up with, it's been a complete
success. I want to close on my personal story by debriefing on why it was a bet
that paid off for me.

### Learning

Software Engineering -- not Computer Science -- is really a practical field.
There's a long list of topics to know about and some theories to have heard of,
but after that what differentiates the master software engineer from the
apprentice is not 10,000 hours more of theories, but 10,000 hours more of
building software in the real world. As such, I'm willing to bet a lot of money
that no CS degree on this planet would have taught me as much relevant knowledge
and as many relevant skills than I obtained by working in the trenches at
Facebook.

In addition, if there's one thing I believe is really lacking in our education
system today, it is the notion of mentorship. Any great craftsman in history
became a master craftsman by starting as an apprentice of another master
craftsman. Because it's how the real world works, the notion of mentorship --
more experienced engineers teaching juniors the ropes -- is deeply engrained in
any good engineering culture in industry. The reason my learning shot through
the roof when I joined Facebook is not just because it became my day-to-day job,
but because I was surrounded by engineers who had five, ten, sometimes twenty
years more experience than me and who were there to help me and teach me.
Mentorship is literally in the job description for senior engineers, it's
expected of them, and I benefited immensely from it.

I have not heard of any university program that comes even close to the level of
mentorship I received. In college you're mostly surrounded by kids who are just
as clueless and have just as much life experience as you, i.e. zero. Professors
usually don't care about you and rather than graduate students mentoring
undergrads, they usually look down at them in contempt or just pretend they
don't exist. *Zero* knowledge across generations.

Note that the knowledge I gained pertains not just to my work. I was surrounded
by "full blown" adults with families, mortgages and a multitude of personal
experiences. I not only grew professionally, but also matured immensely as a
person simply by being around adults rather than kids my age. Downside is that I
also have a mortgage now :(

### Happiness

If I were to describe myself during my college years with one word, it would be
"intense". I was intensely driven towards achieving my goals and often neglected
everything else in my life: relationships, physical health and mental health. I
never gave myself a moment to breathe or take a break. In addition, I already
mentioned that I found my life in Munich boring and that I was not particularly
"happy".

Comparing that to my life as a full time employee, I would say the biggest thing
that changed is that a huge amount of pressure fell off my shoulders when I
joined Facebook. I was working my dream job and working on my dream team in AI
research. I had realized the short-term future I had envisioned for myself.

Additionally, being full time is a lot less stressful than being an intern. In
an internship, you have 12 weeks to impress and that is really not a long time.
It's easy to go crazy over wanting to perform well, especially since every
intern has some form of imposter syndrome in the first few weeks. Even though
Facebook is known to be a very fast-paced and intense work environment,
development and evaluation cycles are much longer for full time employees and
knowing you will still be employed for the foreseeable future instead of only a
few more weeks makes a difference. I got healthier, spent a lot more time
outdoors and overall became much happier.

### Career Advancement

If we look at my decision from the perspective of career advancement, I clearly
got a lot more out of working in industry than I would have from taking more
classes. Instead of two years of knowledge accumulation to get me to the same
end result of hopefully working at a company like Facebook, I accumulated two
years of valuable work experience *at Facebook*. While peers in my age group
are starting to wave their degrees around to apply for entry level positions, I
recently interviewed at a bunch of companies and qualified predominantly for
senior engineering roles.

Most tech companies today already put out positions requiring "X level of
education OR Y years of work experience", e.g. BSc. in Engineering OR 3 years of
work relevant experience. What's interesting about this is that realistically,
the person who spent three years in the industry solving real problems will be a
much more useful engineer than the person who spent three years learning how to
proove theorems. So a BSc. might still be worth something on paper, but that
worth goes away once you're "in".

I want to dive deeper on the notion of getting "in". Let's consider two
engineers who both got hired, one because of their BSc. and one because of their
three years in industry. If they both spend another three years at that company,
the first engineer will have a BSc. and three years of experience while the
second will have six years of job experience. Who do you think will be a more
capable engineer and thus more attractive to employers? Clearly the second. The
basic conclusion is that the value of a degree is only in getting you "in",
after that its value fades over time. Do you imagine after 20 years in industry
somebody will still bother asking either of those engineers what degree they got
20 years ago?

### Finances

So far I have not touched on the subject of money. It was never a factor in my
decision making and still isn't really to this day. My college in Munich cost
€150 per semester, so when deciding between working or staying in school, I was
not making a choice between earning or losing 100k USD/year like students in
other countries might. Nevertheless, I am clearly in a better financial
situation now than I was as a student or would be if I had stayed a student.

## Should Everybody Drop Out?

Up to this point, I've focused primarily on myself. My story, my thoughts, my
feelings. You've gathered that dropping out has worked out pretty well for me,
as far as I can tell three years on. This poses an obvious question: should
everybody drop out? Are our educational institutions completely obsolete? Would
I tell my children to skip college? Let me answer some of these questions.

### Tech is Unique

only in tech industry do degrees matter so little

### College is about Preparation

college is about preparing you professionally and personally to be an adult. not everybody is as ready as I was both professionally and personally.

### That being Said

^^^^^^^^^^doesnt mean you need college to be ready
What about this thought: finish college once you're ready

### Autodidactism

online learning
practical learning

### Academic Careers

I'm comparing myself to people who get BSc or MSc to enter the workforce, not to those who do PHds and go into research/academia

### Here's to the crazy ones

The world needs more people who build things. Here's to doing rather than talking.

You now know my story. However, every person's story is different

I want to note that the job prospects aspect of this is somewhat unique to the tech industry. If I was in the business of law or medicine this conclusion would 


At the most basic level, the idea behind going to college is to gain the
necessary knowledge and skills to become an attractive recruit in the job market
after graduation (unless you're going the full academic route). Working as a
software engineer at a big software company like Facebook was certainly my idea
of the kind of job I was hoping to get out of my college education. 


Looking at
it from this perspective, declining the offer to join Facebook full time and
instead returning to college would have made no sense whatsoever. If working at
a Facebook-like company was the goal of going to school and I was attractive
enough to be recruited by Facebook, my education had served its purpose and it
was perfectly acceptable to finish college early.



* description of the situation, background, my decision
* my thoughts at the time for making this decision
* aftermath, living with the situation.
  * first few months at fb
  * later on
* my thoughts on my decision today
* my recommendation, talk about the education system
